The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable
by three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of being
associated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods. I find
them recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of the
Second Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "The
Adventure of the Tired Captain." The first of these, however, deals
with interest of such importance and implicates so many of the first
families in the kingdom that for many years it will be impossible to
make it public. No case, however, in which Holmes was engaged has
ever illustrated the value of his analytical methods so clearly or
has impressed those who were associated with him so deeply. I still
retain an almost verbatim report of the interview in which he
demonstrated the true facts of the case to Monsieur Dubugue of the
Paris police, and Fritz von Waldbaum, the well-known specialist of
Dantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies upon what proved to
be side-issues. The new century will have come, however, before the
story can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to the second on my
list, which promised also at one time to be of national importance,
and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite unique
character.

During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a lad
named Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he
was two classes ahead of me. He was a very brilliant boy, and carried
away every prize which the school had to offer, finishing his
exploits by winning a scholarship which sent him on to continue his
triumphant career at Cambridge. He was, I remember, extremely well
connected, and even when we were all little boys together we knew
that his mother's brother was Lord Holdhurst, the great conservative
politician. This gaudy relationship did him little good at school. On
the contrary, it seemed rather a piquant thing to us to chevy him
about the playground and hit him over the shins with a wicket. But it
was another thing when he came out into the world. I heard vaguely
that his abilities and the influences which he commanded had won him
a good position at the Foreign Office, and then he passed completely
out of my mind until the following letter recalled his existence:

Briarbrae, Woking.
My dear Watson:
I have no doubt that you can remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was in
the fifth form when you were in the third. It is possible even that
you may have heard that through my uncle's influence I obtained a
good appointment at the Foreign Office, and that I was in a situation
of trust and honor until a horrible misfortune came suddenly to blast
my career.
There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In the
event of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall have
to narrate them to you. I have only just recovered from nine weeks of
brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that you
could bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me? I should like to
have his opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that
nothing more can be done. Do try to bring him down, and as soon as
possible. Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state of
horrible suspense. Assure him that if I have not asked his advice
sooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents, but
because I have been off my head ever since the blow fell. Now I am
clear again, though I dare not think of it too much for fear of a
relapse. I am still so weak that I have to write, as you see, by
dictating. Do try to bring him.
Your old school-fellow,
Percy Phelps.

There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something
pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. So moved was I
that even had it been a difficult matter I should have tried it, but
of course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was ever
as ready to bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. My
wife agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying the
matter before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I found
myself back once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.

Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and
working hard over a chemical investigation. A large curved retort was
boiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and the
distilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure. My friend
hardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigation
must be of importance, seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. He
dipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each with
his glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing a
solution over to the table. In his right hand he held a slip of
litmus-paper.

"You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue,
all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life." He dipped it
into the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson.
"Hum! I thought as much!" he cried. "I will be at your service in an
instant, Watson. You will find tobacco in the Persian slipper." He
turned to his desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were
handed over to the page-boy. Then he threw himself down into the
chair opposite, and drew up his knees until his fingers clasped round
his long, thin shins.

"A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got something
better, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson. What is
it?"

I handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentrated
attention.

"It does not tell us very much, does it?" he remarked, as he handed
it back to me.

"Hardly anything."

"And yet the writing is of interest."

"But the writing is not his own."

"Precisely. It is a woman's."

"A man's surely," I cried.

"No, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. You see, at the
commencement of an investigation it is something to know that your
client is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, has
an exceptional nature. My interest is already awakened in the case.
If you are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see this
diplomatist who is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he
dictates his letters."

We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and in
a little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and the
heather of Woking. Briarbrae proved to be a large detached house
standing in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the
station. On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantly
appointed drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by a
rather stout man who received us with much hospitality. His age may
have been nearer forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy and
his eyes so merry that he still conveyed the impression of a plump
and mischievous boy.

"I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with
effusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning. Ah, poor old
chap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me to
see you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to
them."

"We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that you
are not yourself a member of the family."

Our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he began
to laugh.

"Of course you saw the J H monogram on my locket," said he. "For a
moment I thought you had done something clever. Joseph Harrison is my
name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a
relation by marriage. You will find my sister in his room, for she
has nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'd
better go in at once, for I know how impatient he is."

The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the
drawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a
bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. A
young man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open
window, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy
summer air. A woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.

"Shall I leave, Percy?" she asked.

He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he,
cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and I
dare say you would not be prepared to swear to me. This I presume is
your celebrated friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stout
young man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in
that of the invalid. She was a striking-looking woman, a little short
and thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large,
dark, Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. Her rich tints
made the white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by the
contrast.

"I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa.
"I'll plunge into the matter without further preamble. I was a happy
and successful man, Mr. Holmes, and on the eve of being married, when
a sudden and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.